ifitwala_ed/docs/docs_md/task-outcome.md, before:

---
title: "Task Outcome: The Official Student-Level Assessment Record"
slug: task-outcome
category: Assessment
doc_order: 7
summary: "Maintain one authoritative outcome per student per delivery, with official scores/grades, criterion truth, statuses, and publication controls."
---

# Task Outcome: The Official Student-Level Assessment Record

`Task Outcome` is the institutional truth row for a student on a specific delivery. Submissions and contributions can evolve, but the outcome is where official status and released results live.

<Callout type="tip" title="Core guarantee">
Exactly one outcome exists for each `Task Delivery × Student` pair, protected by controller guards and a database unique index.
</Callout>

## Where It Is Used Across the ERP

- Generated automatically from [**Task Delivery**](/docs/en/task-delivery/) submission.
- Receives evidence from [**Task Submission**](/docs/en/task-submission/).
- Receives teacher/moderation input through [**Task Contribution**](/docs/en/task-contribution/).
- Stores official criterion truth via child table `Task Outcome Criterion`.
- Publication pipeline:
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.outcome_publish.publish_outcomes`
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.outcome_publish.unpublish_outcomes`
- Staff grading surfaces:
  - gradebook drawer/grid endpoints in `ifitwala_ed/api/gradebook.py` (`get_grid`, `get_drawer`, submit/moderate actions)
  - staff analytics trend in `ifitwala_ed/api/attendance.py` (Academic Standing from Task Outcome values)
- Guardian portal snapshots:
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.guardian_home.get_guardian_home_snapshot` uses published outcomes for recent task results.
- Term reporting source data:
  - `ifitwala_ed/assessment/term_reporting.py` aggregates outcomes into [**Course Term Result**](/docs/en/course-term-result/).

## Technical Notes (IT)

- **DocType**: `Task Outcome` (`ifitwala_ed/assessment/doctype/task_outcome/`)
- **Autoname**: `TOU-{YYYY}-{MM}-{#####}`
- **Child table**: `official_criteria` (`Task Outcome Criterion`)
- **Key links**:
  - `task_delivery`, `task`, `student`, `student_group`, `grade_scale`, `school`, `academic_year`, `course`, `program`, `course_group`
- **Lifecycle behavior** (`task_outcome.py`):
  - `before_validate`:
    - requires `task_delivery` + `student`
    - backfills denormalized context from delivery
    - blocks identity mutation on existing rows
    - blocks duplicate outcomes
  - `validate`:
    - procedural status coherence (`Excused`, `Extension Granted`)
    - release/official-result consistency checks
    - grade symbol/value validation against grade scale
    - captures official field edits for audit
  - `on_update`:
    - writes info comments when official values are edited directly
- **Hard DB invariant**:
  - unique index on (`task_delivery`, `student`) enforced in `on_doctype_update`
- **Service orchestration**:
  - official recomputation: `assessment/task_outcome_service.py`
  - new-evidence flag handling: `mark_new_submission_seen`
- **Desk client script**: stub-only (`task_outcome.js`)
- **Architecture guarantees (embedded from assessment doctrine)**:
  - outcome is the official fact table; submissions and contributions are supporting layers
  - per-criterion official results are always preserved; task totals are strategy-dependent
  - publication status is a visibility gate and does not redefine grading truth

### Permission Matrix

| Role | Read | Write | Create | Delete |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `System Manager` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `Academic Admin` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `Instructor` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |

## Related Docs

- [**Task Delivery**](/docs/en/task-delivery/)
- [**Task Submission**](/docs/en/task-submission/)
- [**Task Contribution**](/docs/en/task-contribution/)
- [**Course Term Result**](/docs/en/course-term-result/)
- [**Reporting Cycle**](/docs/en/reporting-cycle/)

Commit message:

Enhance documentation for admission and assessment processes with SEO metadata and prerequisites

ifitwala_ed/docs/docs_md/task-outcome.md, after:

---
title: "Task Outcome: The Official Student-Level Assessment Record"
slug: task-outcome
category: Assessment
doc_order: 7
summary: "Maintain one authoritative outcome per student per delivery, with official scores/grades, criterion truth, statuses, and publication controls."
seo_title: "Task Outcome: The Official Student-Level Assessment Record"
seo_description: "Maintain one authoritative outcome per student per delivery, with official scores/grades, criterion truth, statuses, and publication controls."
---

## Task Outcome: The Official Student-Level Assessment Record

## Before You Start (Prerequisites)

- Submit the parent `Task Delivery` first; outcomes are generated from delivery + student roster.
- Ensure the student is part of the linked group at generation time.
- Lock grading policy inputs at delivery level before active grading begins.

`Task Outcome` is the institutional truth row for a student on a specific delivery. Submissions and contributions can evolve, but the outcome is where official status and released results live.

<Callout type="tip" title="Core guarantee">
Exactly one outcome exists for each `Task Delivery × Student` pair, protected by controller guards and a database unique index.
</Callout>

## Where It Is Used Across the ERP

- Generated automatically from [**Task Delivery**](/docs/en/task-delivery/) submission.
- Receives evidence from [**Task Submission**](/docs/en/task-submission/).
- Receives teacher/moderation input through [**Task Contribution**](/docs/en/task-contribution/).
- Stores official criterion truth via child table `Task Outcome Criterion`.
- Publication pipeline:
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.outcome_publish.publish_outcomes`
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.outcome_publish.unpublish_outcomes`
- Staff grading surfaces:
  - gradebook drawer/grid endpoints in `ifitwala_ed/api/gradebook.py` (`get_grid`, `get_drawer`, submit/moderate actions)
  - staff analytics trend in `ifitwala_ed/api/attendance.py` (Academic Standing from Task Outcome values)
- Guardian portal snapshots:
  - `ifitwala_ed.api.guardian_home.get_guardian_home_snapshot` uses published outcomes for recent task results.
- Term reporting source data:
  - `ifitwala_ed/assessment/term_reporting.py` aggregates outcomes into [**Course Term Result**](/docs/en/course-term-result/).

## Technical Notes (IT)

- **DocType**: `Task Outcome` (`ifitwala_ed/assessment/doctype/task_outcome/`)
- **Autoname**: `TOU-{YYYY}-{MM}-{#####}`
- **Child table**: `official_criteria` (`Task Outcome Criterion`)
- **Key links**:
  - `task_delivery`, `task`, `student`, `student_group`, `grade_scale`, `school`, `academic_year`, `course`, `program`, `course_group`
- **Lifecycle behavior** (`task_outcome.py`):
  - `before_validate`:
    - requires `task_delivery` + `student`
    - backfills denormalized context from delivery
    - blocks identity mutation on existing rows
    - blocks duplicate outcomes
  - `validate`:
    - procedural status coherence (`Excused`, `Extension Granted`)
    - release/official-result consistency checks
    - grade symbol/value validation against grade scale
    - captures official field edits for audit
  - `on_update`:
    - writes info comments when official values are edited directly
- **Hard DB invariant**:
  - unique index on (`task_delivery`, `student`) enforced in `on_doctype_update`
- **Service orchestration**:
  - official recomputation: `assessment/task_outcome_service.py`
  - new-evidence flag handling: `mark_new_submission_seen`
- **Desk client script**: stub-only (`task_outcome.js`)
- **Architecture guarantees (embedded from assessment doctrine)**:
  - outcome is the official fact table; submissions and contributions are supporting layers
  - per-criterion official results are always preserved; task totals are strategy-dependent
  - publication status is a visibility gate and does not redefine grading truth

### Permission Matrix

| Role | Read | Write | Create | Delete |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `System Manager` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `Academic Admin` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| `Instructor` | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes |

## Related Docs

- [**Task Delivery**](/docs/en/task-delivery/)
- [**Task Submission**](/docs/en/task-submission/)
- [**Task Contribution**](/docs/en/task-contribution/)
- [**Course Term Result**](/docs/en/course-term-result/)
- [**Reporting Cycle**](/docs/en/reporting-cycle/)
